Update human clinical and health data sources page (#93)
elixir-europe/infectious-diseases-toolkit: human_clinical_and_health_data/data_sources.md

* Health data repositories: in some countries, national or regional health data repositories have been established to aggregate electronic health records across multiple sources. For example, in Sweden, [the National Patient Register](https://www.socialstyrelsen.se/en/statistics-and-data/registers/national-patient-register/) collects data from all healthcare providers in the country; while in the UK, [the National Health Service (NHS) Digital](https://digital.nhs.uk/) collects data from various healthcare settings. However, in many countries these types of registries are not yet in place.

> * Health research databases: in a few countries, national health research databases have been established to support scientific research. These databases typically include de-identified data from large patient populations.

Author: Well, finding good examples seems to be the issue here. Online I found that health research databases should exist, but it all remained rather vague.  I had hoped that by putting it out here someone might be able to help. For now I have removed it. If someone has any ideas we can always add it back on later :).

> * Cross-border health data exchange: The European Union is working to establish a common framework for cross-border exchange of health data: [The European Health Data Space (EHDS)](https://health.ec.europa.eu/ehealth-digital-health-and-care/european-health-data-space_en). This initiative aims to facilitate the exchange of health data across borders while ensuring data protection and privacy. The EHDS will include a set of technical standards and protocols to enable interoperability of health data across Europe. Currently the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA) is expanding into a federation of nodes through the [Federated EGA](https://ega-archive.github.io/FEGA-onboarding/). FEGA enables deposition and distribution of health data that cannot be stored outside of the country of origin.

Reviewer: Here I think you can make FEGA and EHDS different bullet points. 

For the EHDS, you could add that one of the key things it aims to do is improve findability of data through metadata catalogues using metadata standards.

### Considerations

> * When selecting data sources for your research, it is important to consider their **reliability, relevance**, and **completeness**. Are the data sources trustworthy? Are they up-to-date and relevant to the infectious disease in question? Are the data sources complete, or are there gaps that need to be taken into account?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When selecting data sources for your research, it is important to consider their **reliability, relevance**, and **completeness**. Are the data sources trustworthy and up-to-date? Are they relevant to the infectious disease in question and do they have the right data to answer your research question? Are the data sources complete, or are there gaps that need to be taken into account?
```

* **Different data holders for different data sources**

>   * Human clinical and health data are collected as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Human clinical and health data can be collected in the form of:
```

      * Electronic health records
      * Hospital data
      * Pharmacy data
      * Laboratory and test result data
      * Disease registries
      * Insurance claim data
      * Mortality data
      * Survey data
      * Consumer data

>   * Depending on how the data are collected, the data can be found across different sources and data holders:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Depending on how the data are collected, the data can be found across different sources and data holders, for example:
```

      * National Institutes of Public Health
      * Electronic health records at hospitals or other healthcare providers

>       * The World Health Organization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      * International organisations (e.g., ECDC, WHO)
```

      * Research data networks and consortia

> * The different organisation of human clinical and health data across European countries:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Human clinical and health data is organised differently across different European countries:
```

* [The Irish Public Service Data Catalogue](https://datacatalogue.gov.ie/).
* [Portuguese national health service metadata catalogue](https://transparencia.sns.gov.pt/explore/?sort=modified).
* [Findata](https://findata.fi/en/).
* [Health Data Hub in France](https://www.health-data-hub.fr/).
* [Health Research Data UK](https://www.hdruk.ac.uk/). 
* [Federated EGA](https://ega-archive.github.io/FEGA-onboarding/).
* The [GA4GH Beacon project](https://beacon-project.io/).
* The [Covid19 Data Portal](https://www.covid19dataportal.org/).
* An overview of additional existing international approaches (not necessarily applicable to Europe) for the sharing and reusing of human data can be found at the [RDMkit](https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/human_data#sharing-and-reusing-of-human-data).

## Data access

As human clinical and health data contain sensitive personal information, they are protected under the GDPR within the European Union, as well as national data protection and ethical legislation in different countries. This means that health data are protected by certain legal rules and requirements. 

### Considerations

* **Process for access - figuring out the access procedures**

>   Generally, access to sensitive data is  granted on a request basis, that is linked to the secondary purposes (a purpose that is different from the original for which the data were collected) of a specific research project. The research protocol of the research project that is requesting data access is generally evaluated by a research ethics committee (REC) or a Data Protection Agency (DPA).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Generally, access to sensitive data is  granted on a request basis, that is linked to the secondary purposes (a purpose that is different from the original for which the data were collected) of a specific research project. The research protocol of the research project that is requesting data access is generally evaluated by a research ethics committee (REC) and/or a Data Protection Agency (DPA).
```

related_pages: 
  showcase: []
  human_biomolecular_data: []
  human_clinical_and_health_data: []
  social_and_economic_impact: []
  pathogen_characterisation: []
  human_biomolecular_data: [hbd_data_sources, hbd_data_analysis]
  human_clinical_and_health_data: [hchd_data_analysis]
training:
  - name:
    registry:
    url:
rdmkit:
  - name: Why are the FAIR principles needed?
    url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/about#why-are-the-fair-principles-needed
  - name: Sharing and reusing of human data
    url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/human_data#sharing-and-reusing-of-human-data
  - name: Identifiers
    url: https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/identifiers
faircookbook:
  - name:
    url:
fairsharing:
  - name: European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA)
    url: https://fairsharing.org/FAIRsharing.mya1ff
  - name: European Nucleotide Archive (ENA)
    url: https://fairsharing.org/FAIRsharing.dj8nt8
  - name: European Health Information Portal
    url: https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.8690f1

# More information on how to fill in this metadata section can be found here https://www.infectious-diseases-toolkit.org/contribute/page_metadata
---

## Introduction

> ## What is considered as human clinical and health data?

Reviewer 2: Ccan this be changed to "What is cosidered as human clinical and health data and why is it important for infectious diseases research?" to align with the other pages?

* **Cross-border health data exchange**: the European Union is working to establish a common framework for cross-border exchange of health data: [The European Health Data Space (EHDS)](https://health.ec.europa.eu/ehealth-digital-health-and-care/european-health-data-space_en). This initiative aims to facilitate the exchange of health data across borders while ensuring data protection and privacy. The EHDS will include a set of technical standards and protocols to enable interoperability of health data across Europe. Currently the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA) is expanding into a federation of nodes through the [Federated EGA](https://ega-archive.github.io/FEGA-onboarding/). FEGA enables deposition and distribution of health data that cannot be stored outside of the country of origin.

> ## Finding (meta)data

Reviewer 2: Do you think this section can be changed to "Search and discoverability" to align with other data sources pages?
